
!SLIDE
!TITLE Decomposing Decomposition

h1. Decomposing Decomposition

* Kurt Stephens
* 2011/11/13
* Slides -- "http://kurtstephens.com/pub/metadecomp.slides/index.html":http://kurtstephens.com/pub/metadecomp.slides/index.html
* Code -- "http://github.com/kstephens/tort":http://github.com/kstephens/tort

!SLIDE
!TITLE Fundamentals

h1. Fundamentals

* Behavior
* State

!SLIDE
!TITLE Acknoledgements

* Viewpoints Research Institute - http://vpri.org
** Alan Kay - "Object-Oriented", SMALLTALK
** Ian Piumarta
*** "COLAs" Combined Object Lambda Architecture
*** Building Your Own Dynamic Language - http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cn7kTPbW6QQ

!SLIDE
!TITLE Emphasis

h1. Emphasis

* Behavior over State.
* Messages over Methods.

h2. Other Emphasis

* Composition and Delegation over Inheritance.
* Objects over Classes.

!SLIDE
!TITLE Behavior over State

h1. Behavior over State

* State is a side-effect of Behavior.
* State is subordinate to Behavior.
* Behavior is more difficult to abstract than State.

!SLIDE
!TITLE Messages over Methods

h1. Messages over Methods

* "Send a message X to object Y"
* NOT "Call the method X on object Y"
* A message is a nown.
* A message has a lifetime.
* Send is the verb.

!SLIDE 
!TITLE Messaging In Ruby

h1. Messaging In Ruby

@@@ ruby

object = Object.new
def object.add(a, b)
  a + b
end
object.add(1, 2)

@@@

!SLIDE
!TITLE Decomposing Messaging

h1. Decomposing Messaging

h2. Message
* selector
* receiver
* arguments

@@@ ruby

object.add(1, 2)
# =>
receiver = object
selector = :add
arguments = [ 1, 2 ]
receiver.selector(*arguments)

@@@

!SLIDE
!TITLE Sending a Message.

h1. Sending a Message

@@@ ruby

# Ruby:
receiver.selector(*arguments)
# =>
receiver.send(:selector, arguments)

@@@

!SLIDE
!TITLE Decompose Messaging

h1. Decompose Messaging

* Send
** Lookup
** Apply

!SLIDE
!TITLE Decompose send()

h1. Decompose send()

* lookup(selector, receiver, arguments) => method
* apply(method, receiver, arguments) => the-result-of-applying-method.

!SLIDE
!TITLE Implementing send()

h1. Implementing send()

@@@ ruby

send(selector, receiver, arguments)
# => 
method = lookup(selector, receiver, arguments)
apply(method, receiver, arguments)

@@@

!SLIDE
!TITLE lookup()

h1. Functional Oriented lookup()

* Find the address of a function by its name.
* Bind the function name to a function address.
* Compiler/linker symbol table.
* Compile-/link-time operation.
* "Early Binding"

!SLIDE
!TITLE lookup()

h1. Object Oriented lookup()

* Find the method for a receiver by it's selector.
* Bind a selector name to a method object.
* Object method table.
* Runtime-time operation.
* Receiver may not be the sole factor in lookup(), e.g. multimethods.
* "Late Binding"

!SLIDE
!TITLE apply()

h1. Functional Oriented apply()

* "Call a function"
* Apply a function to its arguments.
* Bind function parameters to arguments.

!SLIDE
!TITLE apply()

h1. Object Oriented apply()

* "Call a method"
* Apply a method to receiver and arguments.
* Bind method parameters to arguments.
* The receiver is an implicit or explicit argument.

!SLIDE
!TITLE "Messaging" In C

h1. "Messaging" In C

@@@ c

// add.c
int add(int a, int b)
{
  return a + b;
}
// main.c
int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
  return add(1, 2);
}

@@@

!SLIDE 
!TITLE Messaging In Scheme

h1. Messaging In Scheme

@@@ scheme

(define (add a b)
  (+ a b))
(add 1 2) 
;; "add" may be late- or early-bound.
;; "+" is late-bound: behavior depends on the type.

@@@

!SLIDE
!TITLE Function Call == Message Send

h1. Function Call == Message Send

* Object Messaging is a superset of Function Calls.
* lookup() in C is in the linker.

h2. Isomorphic

* Functions can implement Messaging.
* Messages can implement Functions.


!SLIDE
!TITLE The Message Object

h1. The Message Object

Most languages to not reify ("make real") the Message:

@@@ ruby

message = Message.new(:receiver => rcvr,
                      :arguments => args,
                      :method => METHOD_NOT_FOUND)
lookup(message) # => message, side-effect: message.method is computed.
apply(lookup(message).method, message)

@@@

!SLIDE
!TITLE Messages as Objects

h1. Messages as Objects

@@@ ruby

send(rcvr, args) =>
  let message = 
    Message.new(:reciever => rcvr,
                :arguments => args,
                :method => METHOD_NOT_FOUND)
  message.send()

message.send(message) =>
  message.lookup().method.apply(message)

@@@

!SLIDE
!TITLE Lookup and Apply both create Bindings

h1. Lookup and Apply both create Bindings

* Lookup binds selector and arguments to a Method in a Message.
* Apply binds Method parameters to arguments.

!SLIDE
!TITLE Simple Objects

h1. Simple Objects

* Objects, not Classes.
* Method Tables, not Classes.

!SLIDE
!TITLE Structuring Objects

h1. Structuring Objects

* Behavior
** Method Tables supports lookup().
** Apply Function supports apply().
* State
** Accessor methods.
** Slots: offsets from an object's address.

!SLIDE
!TITLE Method Tables

h1. Method Tables
* Are objects.
* Respond to lookup() messages.
* Objects and method tables "all the way down".

!SLIDE
!TITLE Object Layout

h1. Object Layout

<pre>

+----------------+
| ...            |
|----------------|
| apply_function | 
|----------------|
| method_table   |   Behavior support extends to lower addresses.
|================|
| attribute #1   | <===== pointer_to_object
|----------------|
| attribute #2   |   State support extends to higher addresses.
|----------------|
| ...            |
+----------------+

</pre>

p.

!SLIDE
!TITLE Object Graph

h1. Object Graph

<a href="image/object-graph-1.svg" target="_new">image/object-graph-1.svg</a>

